Besides, %Since no assumption is made on the computing task, 
{\UTP} instances may be used to repair timetables, complete partial timetables or generate full solutions. 

Similarly to the schema proposed in \cite{2018muller,ITC2019} for the international timetabling competition ({\ITC}), 
the {\UTP} model is predicated on a multi-scale schedule horizon (i.e., weeks, weekdays and daily slots), a mixed set of resources (i.e., students, student groups, rooms and teachers), and a hierarchical course structure (i.e., course parts, part classes and class sessions). In our approach however, class sessions are considered as first-class objects that must be scheduled individually alongside resources. %For full flexibility, 
The scheduling scheme is based on cumulative resources and multi-resource sessions 
but may be adapted to each instance using entity properties and maps. 
Specifically, 
sessions are cast as single-resource %tasks 
(e.g., face-to-face lectures) or multi-resource tasks (e.g., hybrid sessions) %using multiplicity marking 
by quantifying the needed resources. 
%In either case, 
The resources allowed for a session follow from the distribution that is given over courses (i.e., registered students) and course parts (i.e., designated teachers and rooms). 
The volumes of sessions are themselves configurable for teachers (i.e., sessions quota per course part) but pre-determined for students (i.e., mandatory session attendance per class) while rooms may be reused at will. %within course part boundaries. 
No limits apply on simultaneous resource usage but for rooms whose hosting capacity must match %cumulated 
class size. 
As for session scheduling, start time grids are configurable in each course part and 
the model simply requires full session sequencing in each class. 
Any resource may therefore be assigned simultaneous or overlapping sessions  (e.g., joint sessions, optional tutoring) and disjunctive rules may be enforced as needed to prevent parallelism or cast unit resources. 
%are subject to class-scoped global sequencing constraints 
Lastly, the model sections students into classes (each part of a requested course is mandatory) and supports subgroup inclusion constraints between classes. 
%TODO last sentence on groups: 
Note that student groups are considered a by-product of student sectioning and as such may only be listed in the solution component. 
